Rewrite "The Kubernetes network model" (#47903)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/services-networking/_index.md

## The Kubernetes network model

The Kubernetes network model is built out of several pieces:

>   * Each [Pod](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) in a cluster gets its

Reviewer: (extra credit / nit)
```suggestion
  * Each {{< glossary_tooltip text="pod" term_id="pod" >}} in a cluster gets its
```

        other over `localhost`.

  * The _pod network_ (also called a cluster network) handles communication
    between pods. It ensures that (barring intentional network
    segmentation):

      * All pods can communicate with all other pods, whether they are
        on the same [node](/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/) or on
        different nodes. Pods can communicate with each other
        directly, without the use of proxies or address translation
        (NAT).

          * (On Windows, this rule does not apply to host-network pods.)

      * Agents on a node (such as system daemons, or kubelet) can
        communicate with all pods on that node.

  * The [Service](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) API
    lets you provide a stable (long lived) IP address or hostname for a service implemented
    by one or more backend pods, where the individual pods making up
    the service can change over time.

      * Kubernetes automatically manages
        [EndpointSlice](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/)
        objects to provide information about the pods currently
        backing a Service.

>       * A service proxy implementation, takes care of converting the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * A _service proxy_ implementation takes care of converting information from
```

>         `Service` and `EndpointSlice` objects into packet-rewriting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Service and EndpointSlice objects into packet-rewriting
```

>         Service and EndpointSlice objects into packet-rewriting

Reviewer 2: s/rewriting/routing ?

Author: OK, Antonio wanted to rewrite this point too....

>         rules using appropriate operating system APIs.

Reviewer 3: There can be service proxy implemenations that are userspace can we rephrase this to be less low level "A service proxy implementation uses the Services and EndpointSlices object to program the dataplane using appropriate operating system APIs" or something like that

Author: This is just an overview, and given that all official proxy implementations and commonly-used third-party proxy implementations rewrite packets, it seems reasonable to say it this way.

Reviewer: I agree with @danwinship, and also the data plane programming might be done by something even more custom (for example: cloud provider APIs; compiling P4 code and reconfiguring external hardware).

Reviewer 3: fair enough

  * The [Gateway](/docs/concepts/services-networking/gateway/) API
    (or its predecessor,
    [Ingress](/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/)) allows
    you to make Services accessible to clients that are outside the cluster.

>       * A simpler, but less-configurable, mechanism for cluster

Reviewer 2: Are we comfortable implying Service LB is obsolete?  Does L4 Gateway handle EVERYTHING that LB does?  I don't think so...

Author: What change would you recommend?

I definitely wasn't trying to imply that it's obsolete (and note that the old version of this page doesn't link to the Service LB docs at all, so this is actually making that feature _more_ prominent).

But if we're going to have a single top-level answer for "how cluster ingress works in Kubernetes", it should be Gateway, right?

(I could demote the Ingress reference to a nested bullet point... or remove it.)

Reviewer 2: >  if we're going to have a single top-level answer for "how cluster ingress works in Kubernetes", it should be Gateway, right?

I can't see how that is true until L4 gateway is as complete as service LB?  @robscott 

As for wording here, something like:

"An alternative mechanism for exposing a single Service is the Service API's type: LoadBalancer.  It is simpler than Gateway, but less powerful."

Or something?  I know we don't want to make this "at the time of this writing" but the reality is that, at the time of this writing Gateway does not fully replace type: LB.

Reviewer: I think this PR makes a better compromise than the page as it stands (and obviously so), so I strongly support merging as-is and then iterating.

I don't see anything that is so wrong that it would seriously mislead readers or get in the way of their learning.

        ingress is available via the Service API's [`type:
        LoadBalancer`](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#loadbalancer),
        when using a supported {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="cloud-provider">}}.

>   * [NetworkPolicy](/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies) is a built-in

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
  * [NetworkPolicy](/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) is a built-in
```

    Kubernetes API that
    allows you to control traffic between pods, or between pods and
    the outside world.

In older container systems, there was no automatic connectivity
between containers on different hosts, and so it was often necessary
to explicitly create links between containers, or to map container
ports to host ports to make them reachable by containers on other
hosts. This is not needed in Kubernetes; Kubernetes's model is that
pods can be treated much like VMs or physical hosts from the
perspectives of port allocation, naming, service discovery, load
balancing, application configuration, and migration.

Only a few parts of this model are implemented by Kubernetes itself.
For the other parts, Kubernetes defines the APIs, but the
corresponding functionality is provided by external components, some
of which are optional:

>   * Pod network namespace setup is handled by system-level software

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Pod network namespace setup is handled by container runtimes that use the [Container Runtime
    Interface] to communicate with the kubelet
```

>     implementing the [Container Runtime
>     Interface](/docs/concepts/architecture/cri.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementing the
{{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Runtime Interface" term_id="cri" >}}.
```
(also fixes a broken link)

    segmentation):

      * All pods can communicate with all other pods, whether they are
        on the same [node](/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/) or on
        different nodes. Pods can communicate with each other
        directly, without the use of proxies or address translation
        (NAT).

          * (On Windows, this rule does not apply to host-network pods.)

      * Agents on a node (such as system daemons, or kubelet) can
        communicate with all pods on that node.

  * The [Service](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) API
    lets you provide a stable (long lived) IP address or hostname for a service implemented
    by one or more backend pods, where the individual pods making up
    the service can change over time.

      * Kubernetes automatically manages
        [EndpointSlice](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/)
        objects to provide information about the pods currently
        backing a Service.

      * A service proxy implementation monitors the `Service` and
        `EndpointSlice` objects, and programs the data plane to route
        service traffic to its backends, by using operating system or

>         cloud provider APIs to intercept or rewrite packets.

Reviewer 2: LGTM

## The Kubernetes network model

The Kubernetes network model is built out of several pieces:

>   * Each [`Pod`](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) in a cluster gets its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Each [Pod](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) in a cluster gets its
```

    own unique cluster-wide IP address.

      * A pod has its own private network namespace which is shared by
        all of the containers within the pod. Processes running in
        different containers in the same pod can communicate with each
        other over `localhost`.

>   * The pod network (or "cluster network") handles communication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The _pod network_ (also called a cluster network) handles communication
```

    between pods:

>       * All pods can communicate with all other pods, whether on the
>         same [node](/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/) or on
>         different nodes, without NAT.
> 
>           * (For platforms that support host-network pods (e.g.
>             Linux), this rule applies to host-network pods as well.)

Reviewer: Aligning to the [style guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/):
```suggestion
      * All pods have a route available to all other pods, whether two Pods are on the
        same [node](/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/) or on
        different nodes. This is a direct means to communicate (no NAT).

          * (For platforms that support host-network pods (Linux),
          this rule applies to host-network pods as well.)
```
Pods may or may not be able to actually communicate, due to:
- packet filtering (and similar controls)
- misconfiguration, I suppose
- outages

Author: I brought back the "barring intentional network segmentation" text from before. That applies to the "agents on a node" subclause too, so I put it at the "the pod network handles communication" level rather than the "all pods can communicate" level.

On the Linux thing, it felt weird to be calling out the Linux behavior, which is the expected behavior, rather than the Windows behavior, which is considered wrong, so I flipped that.

>       * Agents on a node (e.g. system daemons, kubelet) can communicate
>         with all pods on that node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Agents on a node (such as system daemons, kubelet) can communicate
        with all pods on that node.
```

>   * The [`Service`](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The [Service](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) API
```

>     lets you provide a stable "cluster IP" for a service implemented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    lets you provide a stable (long lived) IP address or hostname for a service implemented
```

    by one or more backend pods, where the individual pods making up
    the service can change over time.

>       * Kubernetes creates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Kubernetes automatically manages
```

>         [`EndpointSlice`](content/en/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        [EndpointSlice](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/)
```

        objects to provide information about the pods currently
        backing a Service.

      * A service proxy implementation, takes care of converting the
        `Service` and `EndpointSlice` objects into packet-rewriting
        rules using appropriate operating system APIs.

>   * The [`Gateway`](/docs/concepts/services-networking/gateway/) API
>     (or its predecessor,
>     [`Ingress`](/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/)) allows
>     you to make Services accessible from outside the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The [Gateway](/docs/concepts/services-networking/gateway/) API
    (or its predecessor,
    [Ingress](/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/)) allows
    you to make Services accessible to clients that are outside the cluster.
```

      * A simpler, but less-configurable, mechanism for cluster
        ingress is available via the Service API's [`type:
        LoadBalancer`](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#loadbalancer),
        when using a supported {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="cloud-provider">}}.

>   * [`NetworkPolicy`](/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * [NetworkPolicy](/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies) is a built-in
    Kubernetes API that
```

    allows you to control traffic between pods, or between pods and

>     the outside world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the outside world. Your cluster **only** enforces NetworkPolicy if the cluster network supports
    that kind of enforcement; read the NetworkPolicy documentation to learn more about this
    restriction.
```

Author: (I didn't add anything here, but I did add it below.)

In older container systems, there was no automatic connectivity
between containers on different hosts, and so it was often necessary
to explicitly create links between containers, or to map container
ports to host ports to make them reachable by containers on other
hosts. This is not needed in Kubernetes; Kubernetes's model is that

> `Pods` can be treated much like VMs or physical hosts from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pods can be treated much like VMs or physical hosts from the
```

perspectives of port allocation, naming, service discovery, load
balancing, application configuration, and migration.

Only a few parts of this model are implemented by Kubernetes itself.
For the other parts, Kubernetes defines the APIs, but the
corresponding functionality is provided by external components:

  * Pod network namespace setup is handled by system-level software
    implementing the [Container Runtime
    Interface](/docs/concepts/architecture/cri.md).

  * The pod network itself is managed by a [pod network
    implementation](/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/addons/#networking-and-network-policy).
    On Linux, most container runtimes use the
    {{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Networking Interface (CNI)" term_id="cni" >}}
    to interact with the pod network implementation, so these

>     implementations are often called "CNI plugins"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    implementations are often called _CNI plugins_.
```

  * Kubernetes provides a default implementation of service proxying,
    called {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="kube-proxy">}}, but some pod
    network implementations instead use their own service proxy that
    is more tightly integrated with the rest of the implementation.

  * There are many [implementations of the Gateway
    API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations/), some of
    which are specific to particular cloud environments, some more
    focused on "bare metal" environments, and others more generic.

> 

Reviewer: Please add a (repeated) disclaimer / admonition about NetworkPolicy and note that
it may not be enforced even though you can define one.

(aside: wouldn't it be great if there was a default warning, that gets turned off when a network plugin marks NetworkPolicy - the API - as enforced?)

Also:

```suggestion

## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}

```

Author: > (aside: wouldn't it be great if there was a default warning, that gets turned off when a network plugin marks NetworkPolicy - the API - as enforced?)

ah, but then all existing plugins would erroneously trigger the warning until they got updated :slightly_frowning_face:. But we learned from our mistakes at least; AdminNetworkPolicy is a CRD that is installed by the ANP implementation, so if the API is present, then it's implemented. (And the plan, hopefully, is to eventually add "DeveloperNetworkPolicy" as a replacement for NetworkPolicy, which would work the same way, and then we can deprecate NetworkPolicy, and then we'll all have jetpacks and flying cars.)

Until then, the existence of https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kube-network-policies means there's no good reason to not implement NetworkPolicy these days so hopefully lack-of-NP support will become less common...

Reviewer: We still have to let people know about the risk, so long as there is a network plugin that enables packet networking but not NetworkPolicy.

      * Agents on a node (e.g. system daemons, kubelet) can communicate
        with all pods on that node.

  * The [Service](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) API

>     lets you provide a stable (long lived) IP address or hostname for a service implemented

Reviewer 3: what is the "long lived" meaning here? it can be short lived, is about is `reserved` ? or something like that?

Reviewer: It can outlive one Pod, is what I want to convey.

    On Linux, most container runtimes use the
    {{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Networking Interface (CNI)" term_id="cni" >}}
    to interact with the pod network implementation, so these

>     implementations are often called _CNI plugins_.

Reviewer 3: I'm surprised you didn't added "network plugins"  here too :)
